In the previous videos we have solved recurrence relations of
decreasing functions
Let us write those recurrence relations and analyse their time
complexity and see if we can find any pattern
The first one is T(n) equal to
T(n-1) + 1 and it's time complexity
is n. The second one is T(n) is equal to
T(n-1) + n and it's time complexity is
n^2 .the third one is T(n) is equal to
T(n-1) + logn and it's time complexity
is nlogn
If we observe the about recurrence relations and their results
we can find that if the first part is T(n-1)
then the second part's time complexity
is multiplied by n in the result
See here the second part is 1 , 1 is multiplied by
n and the result becomes n here the second part is n
and the second part is multiplied by n and the result becomes
n^2. Similarly here the second part is logn. logn
is multiplied by n and the result becomes nlogn.
Basically what it means is
When n is decreasing one by one in each
recursive call it takes n unit of time and we
are multiplying this n unit of time with a total
time complexity of the logic that we have inside the
recursive call
For example in the first algorithm the logic inside the
recursive call just takes one unit of time
So the total time complexity is  n*1 that is
O(n). In the second algorithm the logic inside
the recrusive call takes n units of time so total
time complexity n*n that is
O(n^2)
Similarly, In the third algorithm the logic inside the recursive
call takes logn units of time so total time
complexity is n*logn
that is O(logn)
And if that is the case what will be the
total time complexity If the logic inside the recursive
call takes n square units of time and the value
of n is decreasing one by one in each recursive
calls
In other words what will be the time complexity of
this recurrence relation t(n) equal to
T(n-1) + n^2
It's very simple
Just multiply n with n^2 and we will get
total time complexity O(n^3)
Similarly if T(n) equals to T(n-1)
+ n3 then the result is
n*n^3
That is O(n^4)
Based on this what we can say is in a
recurrence relation
If the recursive call is decreasing one by one at
each level then the total time complexity is
n into time complexity of the logic which is present inside
the recursive call
So that's it
But what happens when n decreases by two or three
instead of one. Will it make any difference in total
time complexity. No it won't make any difference
Let's say how letters take this recurrence relation
T(n)= T(n-k) + 1
K can be any postive in the just say +1,2,3, 500
or 1000 anything if the value of k is 1
T(n) will take n steps to reach the base
case
If value of k is 2 T(n) will take
n/2 steps to reach the base case
If value of k is 50 , then T(n) will take
n/50 steps to reach the base case. For
smaller input size we can say n/2 is
smaller than n and n/50 is smaller than
n/2
But when input size becomes bigger and bigger say
n equal to 10 million or 100 million then n/2
and n/50 and n/k are asymptotically
equal to O(n) so it won't
make any difference in total time complexity
So in general if we have the recurrence relation of
this pattern T(n) equal to T(n-k) + x
the total time complexity is
n*x
This rule only applies to this recurrence factor
It won't apply to all type of recurrence relation for
example if we have a coefficient before T(n-1)
are instead of minus
If we have a division operation this rule won't work.